Some Editorial Refurbishment (#14)
confidential-computing/twi-wimse: draft-twi-reference-architecture.md

      org: Confidential Computing Consortium Trustworthy Workload Identity SIG

--- abstract

This document illustrates a gap analysis that is the output of the Confidential Computing Consortium identifying areas in the IETF WIMSE WG work where the current WIMSE architecture should be extended to accommodate workloads running in Confidential Computing environments. This document outlines high-level requirements for the these extensions and describes a series of use cases.

--- middle

# Introduction

> Until recently, there were few scenarios requiring data-in-use protection. This is starting to change. Regulatory bodies worldwide are increasingly requiring data-in-use protection and privacy enhancing technologies. Outside of regulatory requirements, companies are exploring:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Until recently, there were few scenarios requiring data-in-use protection. This is starting to change. Regulatory bodies worldwide are increasingly requiring data-in-use protection and privacy enhancing technologies. Outside of regulatory requirements, there are many use cases, which needs data-in-use protection, few are listed below.
```

Workload Credential:

: an ephemeral identity document containing the Workload Identifier and a number of additional claims, that can be short-lived or long-lived, and that is used to represent and prove Workload Identity to a Relying Party.

Workload Provenance:

: a unique linkage between a Workload Credential and the trusted entities (such as a vendor, developer, or issuer) responsible for the production and/or the remote attestation of the corresponding Workload.

# Gap Analysis

The following shortcomings were identified by performing a gap analysis of the current WIMSE architecture {{-WIMSE}} against the requirements underlying Trustworthy Workload Identity (TWI). The gap analysis provides a basis for identifying extensions necessary to meet the level of trustworthiness required by Confidential Computing environments.

* Protection of Credentials at runtime and insufficient Runtime Attestation:
  * Risk that credentials in memory could be exposed if a Workload’s execution environment is compromised.

>   * Confidential Computing does not trust its hosting environment and relies on each Workload attesting itself.

Reviewer 2: "_Confidential Computing does not trust its hosting environment_" may be misleading as the hardware could also colloquially be thought of as a part of hosting environment.
Try:
```suggestion
  * Confidential Computing relies on each Workload attesting _itself_ to a _hardware_ Root of Trust (HW RoT), explicitly considering the hosting environment configuration and firmware/software (i.e. virtualization stack controlled by the environment provider) as *untrusted*.
```

      org: Confidential Computing Consortium Trustworthy Workload Identity SIG

--- abstract

> This document illustrates a gap analysis that is the output of the Confidential Computing Consortium identifying areas in the IETF WIMSE WG work where the current WIMSE architecture should be extended to accommodate workloads running in Confidential Computing environments. This document outlines high-level requirements for the these extensions and describes a series of use cases.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This document illustrates a gap analysis that is the output of the Confidential Computing Consortium identifying areas in the IETF WIMSE WG work where the current WIMSE architecture should be amended to accommodate workloads running in Confidential Computing environments. This document outlines high-level requirements for the these extensions and describes a series of use cases.
```

--- middle

# Introduction
Until recently, there were few scenarios requiring data-in-use protection. This is starting to change. Regulatory bodies worldwide are increasingly requiring data-in-use protection and privacy-enhancing technologies. Outside of regulatory requirements, companies are exploring:

* Multiparty computation
* Machine learning training & inferencing
* Addressing the risks of computing in public clouds and high-risk locations
* Entrusting confidential data to SaaS providers
* Insider threats, and other reasons for protecting data-in-use

> Correspondingly, there is an increased push to harmonize management and governance of human and non-human identities. Entities interested in strong assurances around the security of their deployed workloads, for regulatory, contractual or peace of mind reasons, are starting to face large and challenging tasks of upgrading their existing computing system infrastructure to meet these requirements.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Correspondingly, there is an increased push to harmonize management and governance of human and non-human identities.
Modern workloads may operate with both credentials corresponding to themselves, and to agents they are asked to impersonate.
Entities interested in strong assurances around the security of their deployed workloads, for regulatory, contractual or peace of mind reasons, are starting to face large and challenging tasks of upgrading their existing computing system infrastructure to meet these requirements.
```

Current ways of issuing and managing workload identities, as well as those required for effective protection of data-in-use, are subject to multiple architectural challenges; chief among them:

1. Lack of workload isolation against the hardware and the operating system owners/administrators, as well as peer workload instances
2. Lack of strong binding between a workload credential and the workload instance to which that credential had been issued

> 3. Inability to associate a credential with a set of decisions leading up to its issuance

Reviewer 3: We might want to add "lack of certainty about the composition of the workload" which captures both weak attestation and lack of provenance information

see {{Section 4 of -rats-arch}} , {{-WIMSE}} & {{-TWISIGCharter}}.

The definitions of terms like Workload Identity, Workload Credential and Workload Provenance match those specified by the TWI SIG Charter {{-TWISIGCharter}}.

Workload:

: a running instance of software executed in support of a specific purpose.

: The definition of Workload in this document restricts the definition of the term Workload as defined by {{-WIMSE}} to composition of code and configuration of a (WIMSE-defined) Workload that is subject to Remote Attestation.

Workload Identifier:

: a stable value construct in support of a Relying Party's long-lived Workload authorization policies.

Workload Identity:

: the definition of Workload Identity is identical to the definition of {{-WIMSE}}: "a combination of three basic building blocks: trust domain, Workload Identifier and identity credentials.

Workload Credential:

: an ephemeral identity document containing the Workload Identifier and a number of additional claims, that can be short-lived or long-lived, and that is used to represent and prove Workload Identity to a Relying Party.

Workload Provenance:

> : a linkage between a Workload Credential and a trusted entity (e.g., a vendor, developer, or issuer) responsible for the production and/or the remote attestation of a corresponding Workload.

Reviewer 3: ...and also... this, as stated, is easily misunderstood to mean somethin other than what we want it to mean. For instance, the name of an issuer bound to the credential is a "linkage" between that credential and the issuer, but it says nothing about provenance. Provenance is something specific to the credential in question that can help identify which decisions led to the issuance of the credential. Let's discuss.

> : a linkage between a Workload Credential and a trusted entity (e.g., a vendor, developer, or issuer) responsible for the production and/or the remote attestation of a corresponding Workload.

Reviewer 4: > "a trusted entity" implies only one, but there's a combination of entities at play here. Let's discuss?

Referring to ‘a trusted entity’ suggests singularity, which misrepresents our architecture. We should clarify that trust may be derived from a composite of entities, not just one, especially in distributed or federated issuance models

> : a linkage between a Workload Credential and a trusted entity (e.g., a vendor, developer, or issuer) responsible for the production and/or the remote attestation of a corresponding Workload.

Reviewer 4: > ...and also... this, as stated, is easily misunderstood to mean something other than what we want it to mean. For instance, the name of an issuer bound to the credential is a "linkage" between that credential and the issuer, but it says nothing about provenance. Provenance is something specific to the credential in question that can help identify which decisions led to the issuance of the credential. Let's discuss.

Let’s be careful not to conflate linkage with provenance. The presence of an issuer name is a linkage—but provenance captures the credential’s path and intent, including issuance context and decision lineage.

The current language risks conflating linkage (e.g., “issuer name in a credential”) with provenance (the broader context and history of how and why the credential was created). This confusion can lead to incorrect assumptions about trust, authenticity, and responsibility.

Modern workloads may operate on their own behalf with their own credentials, or as agents on behalf of other entities with delegated credentials.
Entities interested in strong assurances around the security of their deployed workloads, for regulatory, contractual or peace of mind reasons, are starting to face large and challenging tasks of upgrading their existing computing system infrastructure to meet these requirements.
Current ways of issuing and managing workload identities, as well as those required for effective protection of data-in-use, are subject to multiple architectural challenges; chief among them:

1. Lack of workload isolation against the hardware and the operating system owners/administrators, as well as peer workload instances
2. Lack of strong binding between a workload credential and the workload instance to which that credential had been issued
3. Lack of verifiable composition of the workload, and inability to associate a credential with a set of decisions leading up to its issuance

It is important to highlight that these requirements are related: lack of process isolation eases credential exfiltration and leads to credential leakage and reuse.

> In the immediate term, effective Confidential Computing faces a significant challenge: the scale of uplift and immature tooling are both clear barriers. Longer term, however, Confidential Computing provides a vital improvement due to its unique features (i.e., isolation capabilities) and broad availability (i.e., support by various major hardware vendors).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In the immediate term, effective Confidential Computing faces a significant challenge: the scale of uplift and immature tooling are both clear barriers.
Longer term, however, Confidential Computing provides a vital improvement due to its unique features (i.e., verifiable composition, strong workload isolation) and broad availability (i.e., support by all major hardware vendors).
Multiple emerging regulations will mean that customers will be looking to these features and capabilities to satisfy them.
```

Workload Credential:

: an ephemeral identity document containing the Workload Identifier and a number of additional claims, that can be short-lived or long-lived, and that is used to represent and prove Workload Identity to a Relying Party.

Workload Provenance:

: a linkage between a Workload Credential and a trusted entity (e.g., a vendor, developer, or issuer) responsible for the production and/or the remote attestation of a corresponding Workload.

# Gap Analysis

The following shortcomings were identified by performing a gap analysis of the current WIMSE architecture {{-WIMSE}} against the requirements underlying Trustworthy Workload Identity (TWI). The gap analysis provides a basis for identifying extensions necessary to meet the level of trustworthiness required by Confidential Computing environments.

* Protection of Credentials at runtime and insufficient Runtime Attestation:
  * Risk that credentials in memory could be exposed if a workload’s execution environment is compromised.

>   * Runtime can still be compromised, even if keys are securely managed, a compromised runtime can still leak. Similarly, a secure runtime is less effective if key management is weak. Integrating both robust key lifecycle management and continuous runtime attestation provides better security.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  * Confidential Computing does not trust its hosting environment and relies on each Workload attesting itself.
```

To address this set of requirements, this document defines and elaborates on the concept of `Trustworthy Workload Identity` (TWI) in the following Sections.

# Conventions and Definitions
{: #definitions }

{::boilerplate bcp14-tagged}

This document uses terms and concepts defined by the WIMSE and RATS architectures, as well as to the terms defined by the Trustworthy Workload Identity Special Interest Gorup at the Confidential Computing Consortium. For a complete glossary,
see {{Section 4 of -rats-arch}} , {{-WIMSE}} & {{-TWISIGCharter}}.

The definitions of terms like Workload Identity, Workload Credential and Workload Provenance match those specified by the TWI SIG Charter {{-TWISIGCharter}}.

Workload:

: {{-WIMSE}} defines 'Workload' as "an instance of software executing for a specific purpose. Here we restrict that definition to the portion of the software instance and its configuration that is subject to Remote Attestation.

Workload Identifier:

> : a stable value construct in support of a Relying Party's long-lived Workload authorization policies.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
: is a stable construct around which Relying Parties can form long-lived Workload authorization policies.
```

Workload Identity:

> : the definition of Workload Identity is identical to the definition of {{-WIMSE}}: "a combination of three basic building blocks: trust domain, Workload Identifier and identity credentials.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
: the definition of Workload Identity is identical to the definition of the same term by {{-WIMSE}}: "a combination of three basic building blocks: trust domain, Workload Identifier and identity credentials.
```

1. Lack of workload isolation against the hardware and the operating system owners/administrators, as well as peer workload instances
2. Lack of strong binding between a workload credential and the workload instance to which that credential had been issued
3. Lack of verifiable composition of the workload, and inability to associate a credential with a set of decisions leading up to its issuance

It is important to highlight that these requirements are related: lack of process isolation eases credential exfiltration and leads to credential leakage and reuse.

In the immediate term, effective Confidential Computing faces a significant challenge: the scale of uplift and immature tooling are both clear barriers.
Longer term, however, Confidential Computing provides a vital improvement due to its unique features (i.e., verifiable composition, strong workload isolation) and broad availability (i.e., support by all major hardware vendors).
Multiple emerging regulations will mean that customers will be looking to these features and capabilities to satisfy them.

> Confidential Computing-assisted mechanisms have to align with the emerging Workload Identity solution ecosystem. Correspondingly, the evolution of the Workload Identity ecosystem should remain in alignment with the expectations of the owners and operators of Confidential Computing workloads. To address this bi-lateral balance of requirements, this document defines elaborates on the concept of `Trustworthy Workload Identity` (TWI) in the following Sections. Data-in-use protection of workloads supporting TWI results in critical downstream effects.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Confidential Computing-assisted mechanisms have to align with the emerging Workload Identity solution ecosystem. Correspondingly, the evolution of the Workload Identity ecosystem should remain in alignment with the expectations of the owners and operators of Confidential Computing workloads.
To address this set of requirements, this document defines and elaborates on the concept of `Trustworthy Workload Identity` (TWI) in the following Sections.
Data-in-use protection of workloads supporting TWI results in critical downstream effects.
```

# Conventions and Definitions
{: #definitions }

{::boilerplate bcp14-tagged}

This document uses terms and concepts defined by the WIMSE and RATS architectures, as well as to the terms defined by the Trustworthy Workload Identity Special Interest Gorup at the Confidential Computing Consortium. For a complete glossary,
see {{Section 4 of -rats-arch}} , {{-WIMSE}} & {{-TWISIGCharter}}.

The definitions of terms like Workload Identity, Workload Credential and Workload Provenance match those specified by the TWI SIG Charter {{-TWISIGCharter}}.

Workload:

> : a running instance of software executed in support of a specific purpose.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
: {{-WIMSE}} defines 'Workload' as "an instance of software executing for a specific purpose. Here we restrict that definition to the portion of the software instance and its configuration that is subject to Remote Attestation.
```

Modern workloads may operate on their own behalf with their own credentials, or as agents on behalf of other entities with delegated credentials.
Entities interested in strong assurances around the security of their deployed workloads, for regulatory, contractual or peace of mind reasons, are starting to face large and challenging tasks of upgrading their existing computing system infrastructure to meet these requirements.
Current ways of issuing and managing workload identities, as well as those required for effective protection of data-in-use, are subject to multiple architectural challenges; chief among them:

1. Lack of workload isolation against the hardware and the operating system owners/administrators, as well as peer workload instances
2. Lack of strong binding between a workload credential and the workload instance to which that credential had been issued
3. Lack of verifiable composition of the workload, and inability to associate a credential with a set of decisions leading up to its issuance

It is important to highlight that these requirements are related: lack of process isolation eases credential exfiltration and leads to credential leakage and reuse.

> Longer term, however, Confidential Computing provides a vital improvement due to its unique features (i.e., verifiable composition, strong workload isolation) and broad availability (i.e., support by all major hardware vendors).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Confidential Computing can close these architectural gaps due to its unique features (i.e., verifiable composition, strong workload isolation) and broad availability (i.e., support by all major hardware vendors).
```

      org: Confidential Computing Consortium Trustworthy Workload Identity SIG

--- abstract

This document illustrates a gap analysis that is the output of the Confidential Computing Consortium identifying areas in the IETF WIMSE WG work where the current WIMSE architecture should be amended to accommodate workloads running in Confidential Computing environments. This document outlines high-level requirements for the these extensions and describes a series of use cases.

--- middle

# Introduction

> Until recently, there were few scenarios requiring data-in-use protection. This is starting to change. Regulatory bodies worldwide are increasingly requiring data-in-use protection and privacy-enhancing technologies. Outside of regulatory requirements, companies are exploring:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Until recently, there were few scenarios requiring data-in-use protection. This is starting to change. Regulatory bodies worldwide are increasingly requiring data-in-use protection and privacy enhancing technologies. Outside of regulatory requirements, companies are exploring:
```

Modern workloads may operate on their own behalf with their own credentials, or as agents on behalf of other entities with delegated credentials.
Entities interested in strong assurances around the security of their deployed workloads, for regulatory, contractual or peace of mind reasons, are starting to face large and challenging tasks of upgrading their existing computing system infrastructure to meet these requirements.
Current ways of issuing and managing workload identities, as well as those required for effective protection of data-in-use, are subject to multiple architectural challenges; chief among them:

1. Lack of workload isolation against the hardware and the operating system owners/administrators, as well as peer workload instances
2. Lack of strong binding between a workload credential and the workload instance to which that credential had been issued
3. Lack of verifiable composition of the workload, and inability to associate a credential with a set of decisions leading up to its issuance

It is important to highlight that these requirements are related: lack of process isolation eases credential exfiltration and leads to credential leakage and reuse.

> In the immediate term, effective Confidential Computing faces a significant challenge: the scale of uplift and immature tooling are both clear barriers.

Reviewer: As CC is gaining popularity now, shall we delete line 76..? The reason been, it water down a bit our efforts for a need for CC?

Confidential Computing-assisted mechanisms have to align with the emerging Workload Identity solution ecosystem. Correspondingly, the evolution of the Workload Identity ecosystem should remain in alignment with the expectations of the owners and operators of Confidential Computing workloads.
To address this set of requirements, this document defines and elaborates on the concept of `Trustworthy Workload Identity` (TWI) in the following Sections.
Data-in-use protection of workloads supporting TWI results in critical downstream effects.

# Conventions and Definitions
{: #definitions }

{::boilerplate bcp14-tagged}

This document uses terms and concepts defined by the WIMSE and RATS architectures, as well as to the terms defined by the Trustworthy Workload Identity Special Interest Gorup at the Confidential Computing Consortium. For a complete glossary,
see {{Section 4 of -rats-arch}} , {{-WIMSE}} & {{-TWISIGCharter}}.

The definitions of terms like Workload Identity, Workload Credential and Workload Provenance match those specified by the TWI SIG Charter {{-TWISIGCharter}}.

Workload:

: a running instance of software executed in support of a specific purpose.

> : The definition of Workload in this document restricts the definition of the term Workload as defined by {{-WIMSE}} to composition of code and configuration of a (WIMSE-defined) Workload that is subject to Remote Attestation.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
: The definition of Workload in this document restricts the definition of the term Workload as defined by {{-WIMSE}} to composition of code and configuration of a (WIMSE-defined) Workload that runs in a Trusted Execution Environment and is subject to Remote Attestation.
```

> Workload Identifier:

Reviewer 4: A Workload Identifier is a unique reference assigned to a job, process, service instance, or workload unit within a system. In the below section we are defining a workload identifier as a workload identifier. Lets discuss

Reviewer 4: Additionally we should also consider the fact that a continuous Workload Identifier is preferred to a random workload identifier. This will allow the ability to maintain provenance across the workload lifecycle in a sequential manner.  Lets discuss

Reviewer 4: Design Considerations
Should the ID be globally unique or partitioned by workload type?

Should it encode temporal data (e.g., epoch-based) or be strictly incrementing?

Will IDs ever need to be re-used or recycled?

Best practice usually involves combining a timestamp component (for ordering) with a counter or unique suffix (for deduplication). Lets discuss

Reviewer 3: Discussed in the meeting and closed.

: a stable value construct in support of a Relying Party's long-lived Workload authorization policies.

Workload Identity:

: the definition of Workload Identity is identical to the definition of {{-WIMSE}}: "a combination of three basic building blocks: trust domain, Workload Identifier and identity credentials.

Workload Credential:

: an ephemeral identity document containing the Workload Identifier and a number of additional claims, that can be short-lived or long-lived, and that is used to represent and prove Workload Identity to a Relying Party.

Workload Provenance:

: a linkage between a Workload Credential and a trusted entity (e.g., a vendor, developer, or issuer) responsible for the production and/or the remote attestation of a corresponding Workload.

# Gap Analysis

> The following risks where identified by a gap analysis of the current WIMSE architecture {{-WIMSE}} performed by the Confidential Computing Consortium. The gap analysis provides a basis for identify extensions necessary to meet the level of trustworthiness required by confidential computing environments:

Reviewer 3: The gaps are not just about risks. Lack of provenance is a gap, but not a "risk" per se.

Reviewer 4: Can the "gap" turn into or become a "risk" if not addressed in this  context?

> The following risks where identified by a gap analysis of the current WIMSE architecture {{-WIMSE}} performed by the Confidential Computing Consortium. The gap analysis provides a basis for identify extensions necessary to meet the level of trustworthiness required by confidential computing environments:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following risks were identified by a gap analysis of the current WIMSE architecture {{-WIMSE}} performed by the Confidential Computing Consortium. The gap analysis provides a basis for identify extensions necessary to meet the level of trustworthiness required by confidential computing environments:
```

* Protection of Credentials at Runtime, Key Management in Dynamic Environments and Insufficient Runtime Attestation:
  * Risk that credentials in memory could be exposed if a workload’s execution environment is compromised.
  * The current solutions rely on traditional key management practices which may not be good enough against sophisticated runtime attacks.
  * Runtime can still be compromised, even if keys are securely managed, a compromised runtime can still leak. Similarly, a secure runtime is less effective if key management is weak. Integrating both robust key lifecycle management and continuous runtime attestation provides better security.
* Token Replay and Misuse in Cross-domain Scenarios:
  * Even with proper token binding, the risk of replay attacks or the use of compromised tokens across trust boundaries remains, especially if an attacker manages to intercept tokens during service-to-service exchanges.

# Integration of Confidential Computing into WIMSE

## Secure Key Storage & Cryptographic Operations

> With TEE’s, a workload’s private keys and sensitive cryptographic operations (such as signing or validating tokens) can be isolated from the host OS. Reducing the risk of key leakage even if the surrounding system is compromised. (For instance, the WIMSE token—be it a JWT or an X.509 certificate—can be generated and signed within a TEE, ensuring that the proof-of-possession mechanism remains intact.)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
With TEEs, a workload’s private keys and sensitive cryptographic operations (such as signing or validating tokens) can be isolated from the host OS, reducing the risk of key leakage even if the surrounding system is compromised. (For instance, the WIMSE token—be it a JWT or an X.509 certificate—can be generated and signed within a TEE, ensuring that the proof-of-possession mechanism remains intact.)
```

## Enhanced Bootstrapping with Attestation

Strengthening the initial bootstrapping process. A TEE can provide hardware-based attestation that a workload is running in a secure, isolated environment. This attestation could be used as an additional factor during credential provisioning, ensuring that only workloads running in a TEE receive valid credentials.

[^projects]

[^projects]: might be a bit of a stretch/ too much - it basically would be an extension of the bootstrapping projects described in https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-ietf-wimse-arch-03)

## Protected Credential Exchange

For the credential exchange patterns defined in the WIMSE Credential Exchange draft, confidential computing can provide a secure enclave in which the exchange logic runs. This ensures that the process of exchanging or re-provisioning credentials is protected against tampering and eavesdropping.

## Mitigating Runtime Compromise

> Incorporating confidential computing within the workload’s execution environment can lower the risk that runtime attacks (such as memory scraping or side-channel attacks) can expose critical identity or authentication tokens. For example, the confidential computing environment can be used to securely generate and verify proofs of possession that are important within the WIMSE authentication protocol.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Executing the Workload inside a Trusted Execution Environment can lower the risk that runtime attacks (such as memory scraping or side-channel attacks) can expose critical identity or authentication tokens. For example, a Trusted Execution Environment can be used to securely generate and verify proofs of possession that are important within the WIMSE authentication protocol.
```

> 3. Enable the Relying Parties and other interested parties, such as auditors, to make in-depth inquiries into the trustworthiness of the Workload based on its Credentials.

Reviewer 3: Check numbering. "3" is wrong here.

> For Use Case 3, the issued Workload Credentials MUST contain information from which the Provenance of the workload can be determined.

Reviewer 3: Going from Use Case 1 to Use Case 3. Where's 2?

# Acknowledgements

<cref>TODO</cref>

> h

Author: ```suggestion
```
